\chapter{Motivation}

\section{Catching Problems Early}

Years ago, I worked on a propietary low power processor in an embedded system.
The processor ran microcode featuring a custom instruction set. To enter a low
power state, a set of (possibly hundreds) instructions were executed. These
instructions progressively puts the system in lower power state. For example:
turn off IP A, then turn off IP B, then turn off the power island to the IPs. To
save cost and power, the low power processor had very limited debuggability
support.\newline

An experienced reader may start to notice some redflags.\newline

If the microcode attempts to access the memory interface when the power island
has been shut off, processor would hang. Since the power island has been shut
off, the physical hardware debug port is also unavailable, leaving the developer
with \textit{no way} of live debugging related problem. At this point the
developer needs to siphon through (possibly hundreds) of instructions to catch
invariant violation \textit{manually}.\newline

As one can imagine, maintaining the microcode was very expensive. Fortunately,
the propietary low power processor only had a handful of instructions, I created
an emulator for this propietary processor to verify the microcode prior to
deploying it on target. The emulator models the processor states as a state
graph, with executed instruction transitions the state machine to the next
state. At every state all the invariants are evaluated to ensure none have been
violated. Some of the invariants included:
\begin{itemize}
    \item Accessing memory interface after power off leads to a hang
    \item Accessing certain register in certain chip revision leads to a hang 
    \item Verify IPs are shut off in the allowed order
\end{itemize}

The verification algorithm was implemented using a \textit{depth-first search}
algorithm, providing 100\% microcode coverage before deploy on target.\newline

To generalize, we can model arbitrary system as a set of states with a
collection of invariant that must be upheld at all times. The complexity of the
such arbitrarily system generally grows quadratically as the number of states
grow linearly (eg. in a N state system, adding state N+1 may introduce N
transitions into the new state). There are many engineering problems that
exhibit a large number of states, such as lockless or waitfree data structure,
distributed algorithms, OS scheduler, and more. As the number of states grow, 
the problem becomes more mentally taxing for designer to reason about.\newline

\textit{How does a designer reason about the correctness of a proposed
solution?}

\section{The Generalized Problem}

Fast forward to now: I stumbled across TLA+, a formalized solution of what I was
looking for.\newline

The Turing Award winner Leslie Lamport invented the TLA+ 1999, but TLA+ didn't
appear to have caught on until the 2010's. My opinion is TLA+ was invented ahead
of its time, and the problem complexity finally caught up in the past decade or
so, to allow TLA+ to demonstrate its strength.\newline

We are at a point in the technology curve where vertical scaling is no longer
practical, with CPU speed plateau'd in the past decade or so. The industry is
exploring horizontal scaling solution, such as hardware vendor focusing adding
more CPU cores, or software vendors buying many low end hardware instead of a
few high end hardware. This shifts the technology complexity from vertical to
horizontal, demanding solution to maximize concurrent resource utilization.
There is one slight problem though:\newline

\textit{Humans are not good at reasoning about things happening
concurrently.}\newline

Our cognitive system is optimized for sequential reasoning. Enumerating all
scenarios in one's mind to ensure an arbitrary design accommodates all the
corner cases is challenging.\newline

Consider a low power processor execution hundreds of instruction, how does the 
designer ensure the invariants are upheld after every instruction?\newline

Consider a distributed system. The system is a cluster of independently
operating entities and need to somehow collectively offer the correct system
behaviour, while any one of the machines may receive instructions out of order,
crash, recover, etc. \newline

Consider a single producer multiple consumer lockless queue. The consumers may 
reserve an index in the queue in certain order, but may release them in different order. 
What if one reader is really slow, and another reader is super fast and possibly 
lapse the slow reader? \newline

Consider an OS scheduler with locks. Assume all the processes have the same
priority. Can a process starve the other processes by repeatedly acquire and
release the lock? How do we ensure scheduling is fair?\newline

% One \textit{anti-solution} is to assert that these are easy problem for designer
% with the right experience and skill set. While this may be true, it also isn't
% very scalable. It is likely to your organization's 

The \textit{anti-pattern} is to keep bandaiding the design until user stops
filing bug reports. This is never ideal. Per Murphy's law, anything that can go
wrong \textit{will go wrong}, and a hard to reproduce bug will come in at the
most inconvinient time. How do we make sure the solution is \textit{correct by
design}? To solve this problem, we must rely on tools to do the reasoning
\textit{for us}.

\section{TLA+}

TLA+ is a \textit{system specification language}, with the intent to describe
the system with implementation details removed. TLA+ allows designer to describe
the system as a sequence of states. The designer can expresses transition
condition from one state to another, describe invariants that must hold true in
every state and liveness properties that the overall system should converge to.
The key innovation of TLA+ is once the system is modeled as a finite state
machine, the states can be \textit{exhaustively} explored (via
breath-first-search) to ensure certain properties are held through out the
entire state space (either per state or a sequence of states).\newline

\section{About This Book}

To my surprise, there's not as much material on TLA+ as I assumed for such a
critical tool in the designer toolbox. This book was initially a set of notes I
took as I was learning TLA+. I decided to formalize the notes into this short
book, which I hope the readers find this helpful in their journey TLA+
journey.\newline

The intent for the book is to teach reader how to write TLA+ spec for their
design to provide confidence in \textit{design correctness}. This book is
targeted to software designer, hardware designer, system architect, and in
general anyone who is interested in designing correct system.\newline 

To get the most out of the book, reader should have general computing science
knowledge. Reader doesn't need to be expert at a particular language to
understand this book; TLA+ is effectively its own language. This book is example
driven and will go through designs such as lockless queue, simple task
scheduler, consensus algorithm, etc. Reader will likely enjoy a deeper insight
if she has some familiarity with these topics.

\section{How to Use This Book}

This book was designed to be used as a reference, providing examples and
references using TLA+.\newline

Examples are split into two categories: A set of examples written using TLA+,
and another set of examples written using PlusCal (the C-like syntax that
transpiles down to TLA+). I believe they are useful for different use cases.
The differences will be highlighted in their respective sections. All examples
will follow a similar layout, covering the requirements, design, spec, and 
safety properties.\newline

All examples in this book will be presented using TLA+ \textit{mathemetical
notation}. Converting between Mathmetical and ASCII notation is assumed
straightforward due to the one-to-one mapping. Readers are encouraged to consult
Table 8 in \cite{ss} as needed.\newline

The last part of the book provides that language reference and some focused
topic. Reader can use the last part of the book as a general reference. 

